National Football League head coach race, performance, retention, and dismissal
Abstract
The authors tested for evidence of racial discrimination in the employment retention of National Football League head coaches. A robust data set spanning the modern history of the sport (1985–2018) was generated to examine managerial employment tenure, dismissal, and subsequent organizational performance. After controlling for performance differences and heterogeneity between head coaches, the authors uncover statistically significant evidence that Non-White head coaches experience longer employment spells relative to White head coaches in the Rooney Rule era. No statistically significant evidence of racial differences in the rate at which head coaches are fired is found. Both employment tenure and dismissal are largely driven by raw performance, and to a lesser degree, relative performance. Finally, the relationship between head coach race and organizational performance is examined, but no statistically significant differences by race are uncovered.
Introduction
Researchers have spent considerable effort investigating the employment dynamics of managerial and executive leadership in sport organizations (e.g., Allen & Chadwick, 2012; Fort, Lee, & Berri, 2008; Holmes, 2011; Kahn, 2006). This attention is warranted given theory and evidence suggesting organizational performance is closely aligned with the personal characteristics (Hambrick, 1995; Hambrick, 2007; Hambrick & Mason, 1984; Henderson, Miller, & Hambrick, 2006) and productivity (e.g., Bandiera, Hansen, Prat, & Sadun, 2017; Grusky, 1963) of individuals occupying key leadership positions within the firm. The literature therefore has used the investigation of managerial employment outcomes to better understand variation in organizational performance and industry behavior.
Extant research has typically investigated managerial employment dynamics through firm decision making with respect to entry, compensation, retention, and dismissal. In team sports, the head coach (HC) is often the focus of analysis given the perceived importance of the position in influencing success, and in related studies the HC is considered analogous to the chief executive officer (e.g., Foreman & Soebbing, 2015; Humphreys, Paul, & Weinbach, 2016; Ndofor, Priem, Rathburn, & Dhir, 2009). In line with theory, researchers have established a strong link between performance and managerial labor market outcomes (Grusky, 1963) as raw performance has been shown to directly impact HC employment retention and dismissal in a variety of settings including National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) football (Holmes, 2011; Mixon & Treviño, 2004), the National Football League (NFL; Allen & Chadwick, 2012; Lefgren, Platt, Price, & Higbee, 2019), and the National Basketball Association (NBA; Kahn, 2006; Wangrow, Schepker, & Barker, 2018). Performance relative to expectations has also been shown to influence managerial turnover (e.g., Allen & Chadwick, 2012; Humphreys et al., 2016). Researchers have also assessed whether candidate availability (Foreman & Soebbing, 2015) and organizational deviance (Foreman, Soebbing, & Seifried, 2019) are associated with HC dismissal.
An important but relatively small subset of this literature examines managerial employment dynamics through the lens of potential racial discrimination. Goff and Tollison (2009) used NFL coaching data to explain that racial integration in the coaching industry proceeds similarly to innovation in other markets. Braddock, Smith, and Dawkins (2012) demonstrated that race is associated with the ability to obtain positions of managerial authority in the NFL. Rider, Wade, Swaminathan, and Schwab (2016) illustrated that performance-reward bias limits minority coaches from advancing in the NFL coaching ranks. Similarly, Foreman, Soebbing, Seifried, and Agyemang (2018) showed that Black NFL coaches are less likely to be promoted.
Missing from the literature is empirical analysis directly examining potential racial discrimination of incumbent managers in positions of power in the NFL. In other words, while existing research produces evidence illustrating that access and upward mobility can be problematic for minority coaches in the sport, there is a lack of research which directly examines whether minority managers are held to higher standards once they obtain HC status. Therefore, the current manuscript bridges the gap between race and managerial employment retention and dismissal in context of the NFL.
Racial discrimination in sports labor markets is an important topic socially, as well as in the management and economics literatures. Broadly, labor market discrimination has been traditionally defined by economists as the unequal treatment of workers, holding constant the productivity of those workers (Becker, 1971). In North American professional sport, labor market discrimination at the managerial level is a particularly contentious topic given that Black athlete participation rates in professional football and basketball far exceed the percentage of Black individuals employed in front office or coaching positions (Kahn, 2006). To illustrate, The Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport reports that 69.7 % of NFL players are Black, while only 21.9 % of head coaches, 9.5 % of league-level managers, and zero franchise CEOs or Presidents are Black (Sonnad, 2018).
Empirically testing for labor market discrimination is challenging, largely due to the difficulty in adequately controlling for differences in worker productivity (Kahn, 1991). Unlike many other industries, an advantage of analyzing sports labor markets is the public availability of necessary data such as performance outcomes, employment status, and personal characteristics (Kahn, 2000). The NFL serves as an important setting to analyze potential labor market discrimination, not only because of the lack of managerial positions held by Blacks and other minorities, but also because of league-level efforts to increase diversity. In December 2002, the NFL initiated the “Rooney Rule” which required franchises to interview at least one minority candidate prior to hiring a new HC. However, this has been considered a “soft” affirmative action policy aimed at increasing the diversity of the candidate pool rather than a policy aimed at directly determining hiring policy (DuBois, 2016).
The contribution of this manuscript is valuable to the sport management literature because the hiring decision represents only a fraction of the employment relationship between the firm and worker (Conlin & Emerson, 2006). In other words, assessing potential discrimination is important not only in the areas of access and entry, but also in understanding the dynamics of how hired workers retain their jobs and the manner in which employment relationships end. Industry concerns regarding inequality also extend beyond labor market entry to retention and dismissal as five of the eight NFL HCs fired at the conclusion of the 2018 season were Black.
Accordingly, we investigate potential labor market discrimination in the NFL head coaching market by assessing whether minority HCs are held to higher standards in retaining their positions. We analyze the length of HC employment spells and the rate at which HCs are fired using a robust data set spanning from 1985 to 2018. The data controls for HC performance, HC functional and technical experience, HC personal demographics, as well as league, franchise, and market characteristics. Our empirical results provide insight into the intersection of racial discrimination, managerial employment, and organizational performance.
Section snippets
Diversity and discrimination in sport
The literature examining diversity and discrimination in sport is robust (e.g., Cunningham, 2019; Cunningham & Sagas, 2008; Kahn, 1991). This research commonly evaluates representation with respect to race, sex, gender, and ethnicity and most frequently investigates potential discrimination with respect to access and treatment (Cunningham, 2019). Reasons for potential inequalities include the persistence of stereotypes (e.g., Heilman, 2012), prejudice (e.g., Brewer, 2007), the dynamics of
Data and empirical approach
Our analyses are conducted at the level of the individual HC employment spell. The data includes all permanent HC employment spells beginning in 1985 or later and follows all spells through the conclusion of the 2018 season. Interim HC spells that do not directly transfer into a permanent HC position are excluded.1 There are 208 total observations. All coaching and franchise
Descriptive results
Table 1 displays summary statistics for the full sample. On average, the length of a HC employment spell is almost 67 games (SD = 51.51) or 4.18 seasons. Minority HCs represent 13.9 % of the sample or 29 total spells. The average spell winning percentage is 0.440 (SD = 0.150), which lies below 0.500 as lower performing HCs are replaced more often, meaning they comprise a larger portion of the sample. The HC employment spell ends in firing or resignation 84.6 % of time. The average HC has almost 
Discussion
After controlling for performance differences and heterogeneity between HCs, we uncover statistically significant evidence that Non-White HCs experience longer employment spells relative to White HCs following the implementation of the Rooney Rule. While the effect size appears robust, it is important to note the relatively modest sample size which is an unavoidable byproduct of analysis in this setting. Our results provide little evidence that once hired, Non-White HCs are held to higher