The impact of deviance on head coach dismissals and implications of a personal conduct policy
Abstract
Effects of deviant behavior committed by NFL teams’ coaching staffs and players on head coach dismissals are examined before and after a personal conduct policy change. Using 505 observations from 2000 through 2015, survival analysis results indicate deviance committed by players affect head coach retention decisions. More specifically, workplace deviance committed by subordinates, as measured by player fines, increases head coach dismissal likelihood, regardless of the institutional emphasis on personal conduct, represented by a personal conduct policy modification. However, penalty yards and off-duty legal incidents committed by players only increase the likelihood of head coach dismissal following the personal conduct policy modification, which was implemented to deter deviant behavior viewed by external stakeholders. Though head coaches are dismissed following instances of player misconduct, when those instances of misconduct result in suspensions (i.e., coaches are unable to utilize all their resources), the likelihood of head coach retention increases, suggesting suspensions may operate as an excuse for poor performance, thus allowing head coaches of deviant players to potentially forestall their dismissal.
Introduction
Coaching successions and their subsequent effects are a popular area of study for sport management scholars (e.g., Roach, 2016; Soebbing, Wicker, & Weimar, 2015; Wangrow, Schepker, Barker, & III, 2017). Within this area of research, an understanding of the causes of the succession event (e.g., dismissal and retirement) are required (Fee, Hadlock, & Pierce, 2006; Fredrickson, Hambrick, & Baumrin, 1988) due to the complex and involuntary nature of dismissals (Fredrickson et al., 1988). In this area of research, various performance and socio-political forces contribute to involuntary dismissals (Foreman & Soebbing, 2015; Fredrickson et al., 1988; Wangrow et al., 2017).
One understudied factor is deviance, which represents actions that go against the norms of the organization and that can have a negative impact on the well-being of organizations or individuals associated with the organization (Michalak & Ashkanasy, 2013). Whereas deviance within organizations is a complex topic (Litzky, Eddleston, & Kidder, 2006), few researchers examined how deviance impacts dismissals of managers and CEOs. Instead, previous scholars focused on how organizational deviance affects shareholders (Karpoff, Lee, & Vendrzyk, 1999), firm employees (Simpson, 2002), customers (Geis, 2007), and taxpayers (Gobert & Punch, 2007).
The purpose of the present study is to explore the role deviant behavior has on the likelihood of managerial dismissal, with particular emphasis on how institutional policies designed to regulate individual behavior potentially alter that likelihood of dismissal. The empirical setting for this study is the National Football League (NFL) from 2000 through 2015. During the sample period, the NFL implemented and modified a policy to deter misconduct committed by league employees (e.g., players, coaches) outside of the workplace (Mahone, 2008).
Estimating a hazard model examining various types of coaching and player deviance, we find empirical support indicating head coaches are held responsible for deviance committed by players following a policy modification emphasizing personal conduct. However, head coaches may be able to strategically utilize deviant behaviors and institutional policies to forestall their dismissal if used as an excuse for poor organizational performance. The findings in the present study are important for scholars examining corporate governance or leader turnover because an understanding of the effects of leader turnover must begin with an understanding of the causes (Fredrickson et al., 1988). For practitioners, the findings of the present research are important as they make succession decisions or navigate their careers and consider what decisions will allow them to retain their position in the presence of deviant behavior within their organization. Finally, scholars and practitioners can use the present study when considering the effects, whether intended or unintended, of implementing a personal conduct policy for employees.
Section snippets
Literature review
Fredrickson et al.’s (1988) theoretical model of chief executive officer (CEO) dismissals included four socio-political forces that combined with organizational performance helped explain the CEO dismissal decision. These four forces were the: (a) board of directors’ expectations and attributions of the CEO’s performance, (b) boards’ allegiances and values, (c) availability of qualified candidates to replace the CEO, and (d) incumbent CEO’s power. Due to the similarities between coaches and
Methods
To test these hypotheses, we examine head coach dismissals in the NFL from the 2000–2001 season through the 2015–2016 season. The dependent variable is a binary variable indicating whether the head coach of the team-season was dismissed (DISMISS). The dependent variable DISMISS is coded with the value of 1 to represent a head coach dismissal and 0 otherwise. To determine if a dismissal occurred, we examine whether a change in head coach occurred after the beginning of the observed season but
Results
Table 1 reports the descriptive statistics for each of the variables in the model. In this sample, an average of 17.6% of head coaches were dismissed. Within the sample period, 57% of the observations occurred after the implementation of Goodell’s PCP.
Table 2 presents the survival model results. Consistent with Hypothesis 1, all five deviance variables (i.e., variables representing coaching fines, penalty yards, player fines, player suspensions, and off-field legal incidents) have positive
Discussion
Previous research suggested deviance may affect executive dismissal decisions (Ertugrul & Krishnan, 2011; Ferrell & Ferrell, 2011; Wiersema & Zhang, 2013). However, it is unclear how various forms of deviance and institutional policies governing deviance impact dismissal decisions. We examine three types of deviance outlined within the literature: workplace deviance by the coaching staff, workplace deviance by the players, and off-duty deviance by the players. Observing head coach dismissals in 
Conclusion
We examined the effects of types of deviance on the risk of dismissal faced by the head coach before and after a policy change emphasizing personal conduct. The evidence from this study indicates deviance may have both positive and negative effects on dismissals depending on the type and timing of deviant behavior. ODD and minor workplace deviance increases the likelihood of head coach dismissal following the institutional emphasis on personal conduct. However, serious workplace deviance
Funding
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Acknowledgements
Portions of this manuscript were part of the first author’s dissertation while a Ph.D. candidate at Louisiana State University. We would like to thank Drs. Kwame Agyemang, James Garand, and Kristine Thompson who provided helpful comments and suggestions to the chapter in which this manuscript was taken from. All errors and omissions are the responsibility of the authors.
